Lab - Excel Practice​

Objectives

Part 1: Launch Excel and Enter Data into a Worksheet

Part 2: Add Formulas and Functions

Part 3: Save the Workbook and Close Excel

Required Resources
Mobile device or PC/laptop with an internet connection and Microsoft Excel or similar spreadsheet program

Note: The precise steps to format and manipulate data in Excel can vary between platforms and versions. The instructions in this lab are based on the free version of Excel available from Office.com and may have to be modified to match the user’s platform, software, or version to achieve the results shown in this lab.

Introduction
In this lab you will practice what you have learned so far about Excel.

Part 1: Launch Excel and Enter Data into a Worksheet
Step 1: Launch Excel and Start Worksheet.

Launch Excel and open a blank worksheet.

Rename the worksheet “Sales Data”.

Step 2: Add column headers.

Enter the following column headers in Row 1 of the worksheet in order from A1 to J1:
Date, Country, State, Product, Order_Quantity, Unit_Cost, Unit_Price, Total_Cost, Revenue, Profit
Fill out the data for the first seven columns as shown below. Expand the width of the columns as needed so that all of the text in each cell is visible.

Perform the following formatting operations on the cells in the worksheet.
1) Boldface the column headers in Row 1.
2) Center the column headers horizontally in the Row 1 cells.
3) Change the number format of the Unit_Cost, Unit_Price, Total_Cost, Revenue, and Profit columns to Currency.
Part 2: Add Formulas and Functions
Step 1: Using Formulas

In cell H2 under Total_Cost, write a formula that calculates the total cost of the products sold.

1) The formula should multiply the Order_Quantity by the Unit_Cost.

This will calculate the total cost of the units sold.

2) Copy and paste the formula from cell H2 to cells H3 through H6.

In cell I2 under Revenue, write a formula that calculates the total revenue of the products sold.

1) The formula should multiply the Order_Quantity by the Unit_Price.

This will calculate the revenue received from sales.

2) Copy and paste the formula from cell I2 to cells I3 through I6.

In cell J2 under Profit, write a formula that calculates the profits made from the sale of each item.

1) The formula should subtract the Total_Cost from the Revenue.

This will calculate the profit made from sales.

2) Copy and paste the formula from cell J2 to cells J3 through J6.

The worksheet should now appear as shown below:


Step 2: Using Functions

Underline the data in cells I6 and J6.

In cell H7, enter “Total =”.

In cell I7, use the Sum function to calculate the total revenue from all sales.

In cell J7, use the Sum function to calculate the total profits from all sales.

Boldface cells H7, I7, and J7.

Columns H, I, and J should now appear as follows:


Part 3: Save the Workbook and Close Excel
Step 1: Save the Workbook as Bike_Sales_Data and then close Excel.
